% Vitry Manual
% © Hans Höglund 2010









# Introduction
Vitry is a functional programming language and an environment for representation and manipulation of music. The language features an infix syntax and a simple, expressive type system. The represented music can be output in a variety of formats, transcribed to musical notation or used as control data for sound synthesis.

The representation of music is abstract in the sense that it is not concerned with actual sound, but the formal structure of music.  The basic idea is to give the user the tools needed to impliment any kind of musical model, while also providing implementations of standard notions of time, pitch, phrasing etc.

Vitry may be used for composition, arranging, transcription or analysis. It is built for easy integration with other environments, particularly the following:

- Lilypond
- Sibelius
- SuperCollider
                   





# The language                                                                        

Like most functional languages, Vitry depends on functions, values and types as the principal units of abstraction. Mutable state is avoided and recursion is used for looping and traversal.

Unlike most languages, Vitry treats both functions and types as first class values, that may be referenced and passed to functions like any other. Evaluation is strict by default, but lazy evaluation is possible and lists are always lazy. The type system is based on the notions of implicit conversions.

TODO explain structural equivalence





## Lexical conventions

The lexical conventions are very simple. All code is parsed into one of the following kinds of tokens by the lexer: 

- Spaces
- Line breaks
- Operators and delimiters
- Literals for symbols, strings and numbers
- Keywords for special forms

Indentation levels are *expanded* to delimiters before interpretation, allowing nested expressions to be written without a large amount of parentheses. Thus indentation may be ommited altogether if delimiters are used instead. For details on the lexical sytax, see the final chapter of this manual.




## Types

TODO (determine) explain type equivalence 


### Booleans
The boolean type is written as `bool`. Its values are written as `true` and `false`.

### Numbers
Vitry supports bignum natural, integer and rational numbers, as well as floating-point real and complex numbers. The types of these are written as `nat`, `int`, `rat`, `float` and `complex` respectively.

Natural, integers and rational numbers are written as sequences of digits. Vitry will automatically convert integers to rationals and vice versa:

    152
    42
    -8
    3/2

Floating point numbers may be written in several ways:

    0.1
    0.12e10
    2e-5
    0.5/2

We create a complex number by adding the suffix `i` to the imaginary part:

    2i
    10 + 1i
    22.4 + 32e4i
  
Note that to get one imaginary unit you have to write `1i`, as `i` is not a number literal. Complex numbers in polar form may be entered using the `cis` function:

    22 * cis 4
                                                        


### Strings
Strings are lists of Unicode characters. The string type is written as `string`. String values are written inside double-quotes:

    ""
    "test"
    "\""
    "\\"
    "I hate music"


### Symbols    

Symbols are representations of unique values. As values equivalence is 





 


All the types described in this manual are in fact type values bound to symbols such as `bool`, `int`, `nat` etc.

The quote character may be used to access operators and delimiters as symbols. This is used to assign functions to operators and delimiters:

    `++ = concat
    `[] = list
    `{} = set

             


### Or types

TODO

Intersection types capture the notion of *inheritance* in object-oriented languages.

### And types

TODO

Intersection types capture the notion of *composition* in object-oriented languages.
    



## Expressions

Expressions are series of tokens generated by the lexer. Each expression produce a single value. We use the characters `=>` to indicate evaluation:

    1            => 1
    2 + 3        => 5
    (2 + 3) * 2  => 10
    not true     => false
    sin (pi/2)   => 1

There are five basic forms of expressions, namely literal, applicative, infix and special form. Along with the delimiters, these make up the syntax of the language. A formal specification of the syntax is given in the final chapter.


### Literal expressions

The kind of expression, literals are written representation of simple values:

    1
    22.5
    guillaume
    "thomas"
    
The `read` and `show` functions may be used to transform such values into their written representation and vice versa. The show function is used by the interpreter to display values.                                              
                                   
    read "22.3"        => 22.3
    read "josquin"     => josquin
    read "\"josquin\"" => "josquin"

    show josquin       => "josquin"
    show "josquin"     => "josquin"
    

### Application

This form consists of an expression followed by one or more other expressions. The first expression is assumed to be a function, while the others are assumed to be its arguments.^[As in Haskell, functions may always partially applied. Thus function application may be seen as a left-associative binary operation, which is true to the original concept of the lambda calculus.]

    print "hello world"
    not true
    sum 1 2 3 4
  

### Infix expressions

Consists of other expressions, separated by operators. A familiar form is the arithmetic expressions. Examples are:

    1 + 2
    23 % 11
    1, 2, 3
    -1
    ~true
    true | false
                
Operators are made up of distinguished operator characters. Prefix and infix operators are allowed, but not postfix. The following operators are reserved for definitions, type restrictions and quotation respectively:

    = : `                 
    
    
                                            
### Special forms

Special forms are identified special keywords, which are reserved for a particular use in the language. These are:

- `let` and `where` for binding variables.
- `loop` and `recur` for traversal.
- `fn` for function definitions.
- `if` and `match` for conditional evaluation.
- `do` for carrying out side-effects like input and output. 
- `in` and `imply` for module declarations
- `type` for type expressions.

            

### Delimiters

Delimiters consist of the characters `()[]{}`, and may be used to group expressions. Delimiters and must be written to balance. Thus the following expressions are all valid.

    (1)
    (1, 2)
    [(1 + 2)]
    {(1 + 2) * 3}

However, the following expression is not:

    ([1)]

Delimiters are used to indicate precedence:

    2 * 3 + 4   => 10
    2 * (3 + 4) => 14

Delimiters may also be bound to functions, to which the enclosed expression will be applied. Thus look exactly like operator binding:

    `() = fn x:nat x
    `[] = fn x:nat x + 1
    `{} = fn x:nat x * 2

By default, standard parentheses `()` are bound to the `id` function (so they do nothing).

Brackets and braces are bound to the functions `list` and `set` respectively. Thus, these delimiters may be thought of as literals for lists and sets, a fact which is acknowledged by the `show` method.

    [1, 2, 3] : list
      => true

    {1, 2, 3} : set
      => true
      
    repeat 0 2
      => [0, 0]


### Indentation

Vitry use indentation as a way of expressing nested expressions without actually having to write out all the delimiters. This is achieved by a process called indentation rewriting, which is performed on all code before interpretation.

TODO

    john paul
    george ringo
    => (john paul) (george ringo)

    john paul
      george ringo
    => (john paul (george ringo))

    john 
      paul
        george ringo
    => (john (paul (george ringo)))

    john 
      paul
      george
        ringo
    => (john (paul) (george (ringo))) 

    john 
      paul
        george
      ringo
    => (john (paul (george)) (ringo)) 


### Comments

TODO






## Functions       

Functions are defined by the `fn` special form:

    fn expr
    fn parameter : type expr
    fn parameter : type parameter : type ... expr

TODO

At the semantic level, Vitry makes no distinction between functions, delimiters and operators.








    

## Bindings

Bindings is the notion of assigning references (values) to symbols. There are three kinds of bindings: global, parametric and local. 

Global bindings are typically used to define functions and types and can be accessed from any other expression. Despite the name, they are typically encapsulated into modules. Global bindings can be used declarative (i.e. without any need to concern oneself about evaluation order):
    
    b = a + 2
    a = 2                                                                               
    
    c = d
    d = c    
    type c, d

Parametric binding is the process of substituting a the parameters of a function with the given arguments upon evaluation. Local bindings are "one-off" associations that apply to a single expression. The only difference between local and parametric binding except that local binding is performed directly upon evaluation of the given expression. Both are resolved though lexical scoping, thus inner bindings always override outer:

    let foo = 1
      let foo = 2
        foo
    => 2
    
    (fn [foo bar] 
      fn [foo bar] 
        bar foo
      bar foo) 1 2 
    => 1 2 



### Let and where

The `let` or `where` forms provide local binding. They are identical except that the let form expects the bound expression first, and the where form last. Bound expression evaluates to the value of the scoped expression with the given values bound in.

    let atom = expr expr
    let atom = expr atom = expr ... expr
    
    expr where atom = expr
    expr where atom = expr atom = expr ...

Example : 

    let foo = 1
        bar = 2   
      foo + bar
    => 3
    
    foo + bar where
      foo = 1
      bar = 2   
    => 3


The `let` and `where` forms are very useful for creating local variables or factoring out expressions to make them more readable.


### Loop and recur

The `loop` and `recur` forms (borrowed from [Clojure](http://clojure.org/)) are the most efficient way to traverse data structures.

TODO

    loop atom = expr expr
    loop atom = expr atom = expr ... expr

    recur expr
    recur expr expr ...

### Do


TODO






## Conditions

### If

### Match





## Modules


### Import

### Function syntax

### Type syntax

### Implicits





# Musical representation

Vitry provides a large set of types and functions that simplifies the manipulation of musical data. These are  defined in the language itself, giving the user of the power to define structures that operate on exactly the same level of abstraction as the built-in structures.

TODO music vs notation



## Time

Musical time ^[Here taken to mean a measurable unit of time (as in the sentence "one second's time"), not the amount of beats in a musical pulsation.] can be represented in numerous ways. We use a type `time` as a general representation of linear and synchronous time. By *linear* we mean that `time` progresses consistently without repetition or jumps, and by *synchronous* that relations between `time` values can be taken to hold in all cases. This will be sufficient to represent most conventional music. Nonlinear and nonsynchronous time will be covered in later sections. 

### Time scale

TODO absolute and relative (time)

### Positions and durations

Time values are commonly used to represent *positions* in a bar-beat grid, as well as *durations*, meaning the difference between the onset and offset position of a certain event. There is no real need to make this distinction on the type level, but we will introduce two handy synonyms for `time` that can be used to prevent mix-ups when working larger time structures.

TODO make distinction between abs/rel *time scale* as above and abs/rel *durations* as in MIDI 

    type 
      time         = absoluteTime | relativeTime
      absoluteTime = sec
      relativeTime = rat
      pos          = time
      dur          = time
      sec          = float
                     
TODO tuples

TODO scaling tempo

TODO continous tempo scaling

TODO quantization


Relative time is simply represented as rational numbers, using the conventional note names as reference point. Thus the values `1, 1/2, 1/4, 1/4` may be read as whole note, half note, quarter note, quarter note.     

For absolute time we use standardized units:

    implicit type
      min  = 60 * sec
      hour = 60 * min
      day  = 24 * hour
      Hz   = 1 / sec
      kHz  = hz * 10e3
      MHz  = hz * 10e6



TODO

## Pitch

Pitch is readily represented as an absolute frequency value or as a postion in a scale.

### Scales

TODO tuning systems

### Tuning
TODO reference frequency

TODO


## Events

The `event` is the abstract type representing discrete musical actions.
TODO

### Notes
TODO     

### Rests
TODO

### Tags
TODO


## Phrasing
TODO




## Processes

The `process` is the abstract type representing continuous musical actions. 

TODO

### Dynamics
TODO        

### Glissandi
TODO

### Tremolo and iterations
TODO




## Instrumentation
      
An `instrumentation` represents the distribution of a set of events across a set of *performers* or *ensembles*. This is useful not only for instrumental music, but also for distribution of events across synthesizers, or even virtual performers such as sub-processes of a generative piece.

The atomic unit of instrumentation is the performer, defined as a receiver of musical events. There is no theoretical distinction between a vocal, instrumental or virtual performer, but we provide these synonyms for convenience.

    type 
      performer
      singer      = performer
      instrument  = performer

### Performers

### Choirs

### Ensembles

### Standard setups

### Arrangements

### Reductions

TODO 


## Spacialization

As instrumentation is concerned with distribution of events amongst discrete groups or individuals, we may also consider the distribution of events or processes in a spacial continuum. 

Spacialization is generally mostly of interest in acousmatic music, as fine control of the spacial parameter is not available in the instrumental or vocal genres. However, if spacialization is treated a continous distribution in an abstract sense, there are possibilities of using "virtual spaces" to control other musical parameters. It may also be used in conjunction with instrumentation to model the real-life spacial setup of an ensemble.


TODO


## Nonlinear structures

TODO
         


# Transcriptions


## Standard notation
### Metrical grouping
### Spelling
### Style options
### Formats

## Free-form notation

## MIDI

    
# Practical topics

## Building and installing

Vitry targets the [Java Virtual Machine](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_Virtual_Machine), and may be used with almost any operating system. The only dependency is the Java runtime environment. The build requirements are [Git](http://git-scm.com/) and [Apache Ant](http://ant.apache.org/). You may check if these are installed as follows:
                                 
    $ java
    $ git
    $ ant

If not, download and install from the sites above or through your package management system.

As soon as the build requirements are in place, do:

    $ git clone git@github.com:hanshoglund/vitry.git
    $ cd vitry
    $ ant
    $ sudo ant install
                      
Or if you are on Windows:

    $ git clone git@github.com:hanshoglund/vitry.git
    $ cd vitry
    $ ant
    $ ant install

You may append a directory to the install command.

         
## The interpreter

The interpreter is typically the simplest way to interact with Vitry. To run it, simply type `vitry`.

TODO

The interpreter also accepts special commands commenced by a colon. These are not part of the Vitry language, but exist for ease of use in the interpreter.


## Scripts and compilation
            
While the interpreter provides a simple way to experiment and test out code, larger projects will require writing code in files. Vitry accepts text files or precompiled class files for execution. The only difference between the two is that class files may execute somewhat faster.

Vitry code is written in standard text files. Only the UTF-8 encoding is accepted. File names typically have the `.vitry` suffix, allthough this is not required. There is no difference between the kind of expressions allowed in the interpreter and in file source code except that the interpreter commands are not allowed in files. Vitry files may have a shebang line, allowing them to be executed in standard Unix shells.

In a large Vitry project, most source code files will be used to define modules and implicits. To make an executable program a module containin a main function is required.

    in myApp
      main = do
        prompt "Please enter your name:"
        post + ("Hello " ++ _)

To excute a script, simply use:

    $ vitry hello.vitry




## Setting up the environment

TODO


## Calling foreign languages

TODO


## Replacing the syntax

TODO


## Real-time

TODO


## Networking

TODO



# Reference

## Syntax           

    expr 
      : '(' inline ')'
      | '[' inline ']'
      | '{' inline '}'
   
      | 'fn' parameter* expr
      | 'let' binding* expr
      | 'do' '(' expr+ ')'
      | 'if' expr expr 'else'? expr
      
      | atom
      | natural
      | float
      | complex
      | string
    
    parameter 
      : atom ':' expr
    binding   
      : atom '=' expr

    inline
    	: apply (operator+ apply)+
    	| apply
    	| empty

    apply
    	: expr+
    	| expr
	
    empty
    	:

    operator
      Any of the following characters in any order
      ! # $ % & \ * + , - . / ; < = > ? @ \ ^ _ ` | ~ '

    atom
      a-z or A-Z followed by any number of a-z, A-Z or 0-9

    natural
      any number of 0-9

    float
      TODO

    complex
      TODO

    string
      TODO


